# Diabetes Prediction Using Machine Learning

Introduction
image.png


Diabetes mellitus is chronic disease characterised by high blood sugar that further leads to many health complications. With the rapid development of machine learning, its various algorithms & analysis tools can be applied on the vast amount of data collected in hospitals for providing solution to healthcare issues. The main objective of this study was to to predict whether a person has diabetes or not based on various factors such as age, blood pressure, and BMI. The model uses Python and machine learning techniques to make predictions.
Dependencies

Python 3.7 or higher
NumPy
Pandas
Scikit-learn
Matplotlib

Usage
Clone or download the repository


git clone https://github.com/Promilasharan/Diabetes-prediction-using-machine-learning.git

Install the dependencies


pip install -r requirements.txt

Run the script

1. Start with exploratory data analysis by running the following command:
jupyter notebook Exploratory Data Analysis.ipynb
2. Generate new datasets after imputation of missing values using the following commands:
jupyter notebook new datasets generated after imputation of missing values.ipynb
3. Apply machine learning models on the four datasets generated by imputation of missing values and compare their accuracies, Enhance the accuracy of the machine learning models by applying Recursive Feature Elimination and Stratified K-fold Cross Validation, Tune the hyperparameters of the top two performing models for accuracy enhancement by running the following commands:
jupyter notebook ML pipeline on dataset generated after deletion of missing values.ipynb
jupyter notebook ML pipeline on KNN imputed dataset.ipynb
jupyter notebook ML pipeline on MICE Imputed dataset.ipynb
jupyter notebook ML pipeline on simple Imputed (Median).ipynb
Data
The dataset used in this project is the Pima Indians Diabetes Database, which can be found at https://www.kaggle.com/uciml/pima-indians-diabetes-database. New datasets (as shown below) were also generated & utilised for ML model applications & hence for prediction.
image.png

Design of Experiments, Results And Analysis:
- 1). Dataset description 
- 2). Data Preprocessing
- 3). Exploratory data analysis
- 4). Generation of new datasets by using different missing value imputation techniques
- 5). Following Machine learning models were applied on each dataset:
Support Vector Classifier
LogisticRegression
Decision Tree Classifier
Gaussian Naive Bayes
Random Forest Classifier
KNN Classifier
Gradient Boosting Classifier
ML Pipeline: 
Standardisation of dataset
Train-test split
Models application & comparison of accuracy scores
Stratified K fold cross validation of all models & comparison of accuracy score
Recursive features elimination of two top performing models
Hyperparameter optimisation of top performing model using Gridsearch CV 
Final accuracy checking after hyperparameter optimisation
Evaluation:
The model's performance is evaluated using accuracy and confusion matrix.
Conclusion:
For all four datasets, we can generalise that on an average, LR can be utilised as its accuracy was not affected by the technique of imputation utilised for dealing with missing value. So we can use LR model for web app development using Streamlit. 
You can read my project report for further details enclosed within this repository.
Future implications:
Deep learning can be used on the dataset generated by employing imputation techniques.
More data can be collected from hospitals and these models and ML pipeline can be used on that dataset for web app development.
Special thanks: I would like to extend my heartfelt and sincere gratitude to my project guide Dr. Maysson Ibrahim, Lecturer in Computing, School of Computing (University of Buckingham) for her dedicated help, advice, inspiration, encouragement, and continuous support, throughout my project.